you have you recovered after the limiter
no yes good good you actually did pretty
well I'm I was happy about it I think
good job so keep keep on doing it and
you know these lectures are on webcast
dot berkeley.edu right they're also on
iTunes and iTunes version I think all
the for me so check it out and now and
now our lectures are on youtube so i'd
like to welcome our new addition you
know new addition to our audience our
YouTube audience I think this is great
because actually I try to search for
math courses on YouTube and I was
surprised that actually there are very
few of those so if you people want to
learn about multivariable calculus
you've come to the right place and even
if you don't want to learn about not
variable calculus you've come to the
right place so you know unfortunately
there is only one lecture available for
now and it's like you know when you
start watching a television series and
it's like an absurd season and you don't
know what happened in the first season
and the second season and it's exactly
the same here because you know I would
say first season is like from the
beginning till the first midterm and
second season is from first midterm to
second midterm and now we start our
third season I personally think the
first season was the best one but anyway
I think the third one will be the best
so but um well of course all the
lectures are available on webcast at
berkeley.edu and I was told that they
will all be available in YouTube also
perhaps this week there were some
problems with uploading anyway so if you
want if you want to know what happened
on my previously on last 53 you know
should watch out stay tuned right okay
having said that what is this third
season so to speak what is it about okay
and I I personally think this is the
best one it's most interesting one
because that's where we will actually be
able to apply all them all the stuff
that we've learned up to now and this is
actually this has been sort of a
recurring theme and in this course I've
said it many times that our calculus you
can basically break into two parts with
differential calculus and integration
calculus and in some sense integration
and differentiation at the operations
which are inverse to each other okay so
in some sense you can write you can say
very roughly that integration like
differentiation inverse sort of this is
the thesis which you know I will have to
follow up on this and I will have to
explain what exactly this means in the
context of multivariable calculus we all
know what it means in the context of
single variable calculus in one variable
calculus we have the beautiful formula
which relates integration and
differentiation which is called the
fundamental theorem of calculus or
single variable calculus or the Newton
live in its format and this formula
looks as follows on the left hand side
you have an integral and to make this
formula to kind of support this thesis I
would like to write it in this way
integral of a function which itself is a
derivative of another function so you
put a function here which is derivative
of some function f so you could have
Prime and you integrate this function
from A to B and on the right hand side
we simply have the values of this
function at the end points so
F of B minus F of a right so I would
like to think about this formula in the
following way
on the left on the Left we integrate our
function over an interval from A to B so
on the Left I have an integral over this
domain which is just an interval well in
a single verb and by the way no no
walking in front of the front row looks
really bad on YouTube just kidding okay
so on the Left we have a integral over
this domain and because we are in a
single variable calculus now there is
not there are not so many domains to go
around the only domains you can think of
our intervals or perhaps unions of
intervals so that's what we have on the
left-hand side and on the right-hand
side we have this two points which I
would like to think of as the boundary
of this interval so this is an interval
and this is a boundary of this interval
two points maybe let me put them like
let me put them as dots ready and not
not it there is something interesting
have something that can happen here F of
B enters with a plus sign and F over
enters with a minus sign so actually
this point comes with a plus sign and
this point comes with a minus sign and
we can actually read this off from the
orientation of this interval this
interval has an orientation we we go we
integrate from A to B so there is an
orientation and so the arrow points from
A to B therefore the endpoint has comes
with a plus and the initial point a
comes with a minus so you see this
already indicates that orientation is
going to play an important role but so
now the essential point is the following
on the left you have a domain interval
on the right you have the boundary of
this domain okay
that's about the region of integration
in some sense you can think of the
right-hand side also is integration it's
just that you are integrating over zero
dimensional domains which means simply
evaluating your function what does what
do negative and positive means here well
for now it's just just a notation that I
put I put a sign class to this point
which is point B and I sign - to this
point which is point a right and for
practical the practical meaning of this
is the following that when I evaluate
the integral so to speak I evaluate at
this point with a sign plus and at this
point in sign - which is what's written
here right ok so there is some rule here
at some point some part of the boundary
comes with plus with coefficient plus
one and some part of the boundary comes
with coefficient minus one all right but
integral is in a way integral is sort of
a union of two things the integrand the
object you integrate right and the
domain of integration domain over which
you integrate so you cannot make an
integral integral with just one of the
tool you know you need both the
integrand and the domain of integration
so some in this formula there is a
trade-off between something that happens
to the integrand and something that
happens to the domain we see now what
happens to the domain when we go from
left from the left hand side to the
right hand side we take the boundary of
the domain on the other hand let's look
at the at the integrand on the right the
integrand is f and on the left the
integral is f prime so what we do when
we go from right to left is we
differentiate we differentiate and here
we take the boundary and that is the
structure of this is the basic structure
of this formula so what we would like to
do is to find analogues of this formula
in multivariable calculation and that's
what we're going to do in the remaining
part of the semester okay so in other
words what we would like to do is to
prove formulas of the following type on
the Left we have an integral of some
quantity
and on the right we'll have an integral
of some quantity on the right it will be
integral of some quantity let's say
Omega I will explain what kind of object
this will be for in some cases it will
be a function like here but we will also
have more general objects integrated
here and on the left we will have some
sort of derivative of this object this
is just a schematic notation for now
don't read too much into it it's
something like taking differential or
taking the derivative for example here
is just taking F prime okay so that's as
far as the integrand goes and as far as
the integration domain goes here we will
have some domain D and here we will have
the boundary of boundary of G you have a
question right so here I'm talking about
the domain of integration we have a we
have an a formula right we have a
formula formal has the left-hand side
and the right-hand side and each of them
is an integral of something
write a function over domain so I'd like
to trace here on this blackboard what
happens to the domain and what happens
to the boundary as we go from left to
right or from right to left and I
observe that for the domain on the Left
we start with an interval but on the
right we take the boundary of this
interval so it's like going from the
right-hand from the left-hand side to
the right-hand side four domains
corresponds to taking the boundary but
as far as the integrand is concerned on
the right I have some function f and on
the Left I have F prime so going from
right to left I differentiate so this
formula could be thought of as a
trade-off between taking the boundary
and differentiation taking the boundary
at the level of domain taking the
derivative or differentiating the
integrand
okay is that clear
so so this is the basic structure that I
would this is how I would like to think
about the fundamental theorem of
calculus which is over the one variable
culturals which is written here I would
like to first of all think of an inch
taking an integral as as combining or
pairing two different types of objects
one is algebraic say a function the
other one is dramatic a domain okay
let's first that's the first thing and
if I think about integration in this way
then I clearly see what is the structure
of this formula at the level of domains
it's going to the boundary at the level
of functions is taking the derivative so
this suggests that perhaps if I have if
I am NOT on the line but I am on the
plane or in three-dimensional space if
I'm doing multivariable calculus now I
should also have a formula like this
where on the right I would have some
objects integrated and on the left I'll
have some object integrated but the
correspondence would be like in the
fundamental theorem of calculus that is
to say at the level of domains we go
from a domain to its boundary and at the
level of integrand we go from Omega
whatever it is this we will have to
discuss in more detail to each
derivative of some sort you see that
will be the basic structure of the
formula that we will derive and and they
will be the analogs of the fundamental
theorem of calculus and they will allow
us to learn a lot of things about
integrals and we will also talk about
various sort of real-life applications
of this integral what what do these
integrals mean and various applications
of those and such foremost will allow us
to express in integrals of one kind in
terms of integrals of the other kind
that's basically the outline of what we
are going to do next okay so so now of
course the question is to discuss what
kind of objects we should be integrating
and over what in other words the
integrand in
the domains of integration what are the
most general objects that we should
introduce which we should then which we
could then use so I have to obtain a
formula like this and what are the meet
what what is the meaning of the
corresponding integral so these are the
questions these are the questions that
we will have to ask now so let's
remember first of all what kind of
integrals we have learned up to now in
the multivariable calculus we have
learned in the in the second in the
second season so to speak in other words
in the last month or so we have learned
how to integrate functions so integrals
double integrals of functions and triple
integrals of functions right over some
regions in the two-dimensional space on
the plane and over solid
three-dimensional regions in the
3-dimensional space but in both cases we
have integrated functions so it turns
out that this type of integrals are not
sufficient to really do justice to the
kind of formulas which I promised which
I promised which I promise you we will
have to generalize this integrals first
and there are two types of limitations
that we have now there are two type of
things - two types of things that will
have to relax and consider more general
integrals we will generalize this
intervals in two ways in two ways first
of all we will integral learn how to
integrate more general objects and
functions we will integrate
vector fields we will learn how to
integrate vector fields we will talk
about what they are vector fields and
what is the meaning of the corresponding
integral and that that will be the first
kind of generalization that we'll make
and the second realization is that we
will consider more general domains more
general domains they will be I will say
roughly the difference is that they will
be curved we'll consider the most
general curved domains whereas the
domains we have looked at up to now are
flat domains so let me explain what what
I mean by this flat versus curved okay
[Applause]
so let me give you you can just
illustrate this the kind of regions the
kind of regions that we consider here
the two-dimensional regions are you know
it could be some region on the plane
like this and someone might say well
this is curved right it kind of looks
curved but that would be misleading
because what if curved is not the domain
itself which is the interior of this
curve but the boundary in other words in
this subject one of the most important
things is to distinguish domains and
their boundaries okay so that's why I
would like to emphasize it and I would
like to trace the boundary in different
color yellow
okay so so this this is the boundary and
this is the domain they had two
different things this is a domain for
example the domain is two dimensional
right it's two dimensional it's on the
plane but the boundary is one
dimensional and this is always the case
the boundary of an n-dimensional domain
is going to be n minus 1 dimensional you
lose one dimension when you go to on
your path to the boundary same thing
happened here here the domain was an
interval it was one dimensional and the
boundary was zero dimensional consisted
of two points maybe I should make them
yellow also to make to keep the analogy
okay so the boundary here is curved it
is curved now I don't I wouldn't
disagree with that but the domain itself
it's left it's flat in a sense that if
you look at any point here and you look
at a small neighborhood of this point if
you look at a small neighborhood of this
point you don't know what the boundary
looks like so you kind of you don't have
any illusions about about the domain you
just look at a very small part of this
of this domain here and you see that
it's just the same as a small part of
the plane around this point and the
plane is flat there are two you know
this is our the blackboard is flat so
locally this domain everywhere looks
like the blackboard itself so it is flat
you should contrast that with the
boundary itself the boundary is not flat
a flat one-dimensional domain would be
an interval or a line segment so this
would be flat you know for example the
earth is flat this is also flat so you
could have of course you could have a
domain which is flat and its boundary is
also flat we might have some corners
okay so this clearly you should see what
I mean for the one dimensional the
boundaries here it's corrupters flat
okay
then you can ask well what give an
example of a two dimensional curved
domain and that's very easy
think of it here a sphere is curved
right because the sphere cannot be it's
two dimensional the series
two-dimensional is the same dimension as
the plane the information is the
blackboard but you can't put the skier
inside the blackboard I mean you can
project it but you will have to you will
have to make them while and
transformation to the to the object you
will change its geometry right so that's
the point
a curved two-dimensional object cannot
be feet on a two-dimensional plane
anything that is two-dimensional and
that fits in the two-dimensional plane
is flat but there are a lot of
two-dimensional object like a sphere or
tours right and many other things if you
can imagine like surface of the ocean
you know many many examples you can I
can make those are also two-dimensional
but they are not like the plane so they
are curved and so far we have not really
talked about integrating over such
domains and we will need to do that here
okay is that clear what's the boundary
was fear that's a very good question
so before answering this question let's
let's talk about a simple question right
but an Alva question in dimension one
lower you see there is there will be
many analogies between objects of
different dimensions but always it's
easier to look at the situation where
dimension is lower than higher so
oftentimes it's better to start with
lower dimensions and then go proceed to
higher dimensions so a good question
here would be what about boundaries of
what about boundaries of of one
dimensional domains so if you just have
an interval like this we know what the
boundaries it's very similar to what we
discussed in one in one variable
calculus so if your domain is like this
one dimensional domain like this then
the boundary consists of two points but
here's an example
over-over domain which does not have a
boundary or
more proper proper way to say it it has
empty boundary a circle right so that's
the question very similar to your
question you have to notice the boundary
of a sphere so the simple question would
be what is the boundary of the circle
boundary of a circle is empty right so
you see the difference between this and
this in some sense you in a way you can
think of between obtain this by by by
combining this two endpoints right can
closing this to two endpoints and you
see it actually all makes sense because
the boundary as we discussed in the
boundary this point will enter with
different signs this one would say say
if we orient it like this this one with
sign plus and this one with sign minus
when we close them they will sort of
cancel each other right so that's that
that's that's consistent with our
natural observation that this circle has
no boundary likewise a sphere also has
no boundary or has empty boundary but if
you take the upper hemisphere for
example take the upper hemisphere the
upper hemisphere has a boundary which is
a circle right so it's like upper limit
ears like a dome and the dome has a
boundary which is a circle so there many
things that you need to be able to
visualize here and to understand and to
enter see that there are certain there
are objects which do have boundaries are
objects which don't have boundary and if
you always keep track of which you know
where you are
you talk about the domain the boundaries
I inside would three dimension space the
dimension space and so on so that there
are many different options okay so so
this I have explained so this I have now
explained the second aspect is that we
will integrate over more general domains
which in practical terms means that when
we talk about single integrals up to now
we would only consider integrals like
this in other words we just integrate
over an interval but now we will learn
how to integrate over a curved domains
like this curve one dimensional so that
means this yellow Thanks and it could be
closed like this by the way this has no
boundary either just like the circle not
neither of them has a boundary this one
has about there and of course you could
have a curve
a curved curve which okay that it sounds
stupid but a general curve a curve which
has a boundary to right would have this
this - this is bounded so there is a
whole variety there closed curves
without boundary there are curves with
the boundary and the curves could be
flat like this or it could they could be
curved okay right so that but we will
have to learn how to integrate over all
of them and that's just for single
integrals for integrals for one
dimensional integral the two dimensional
integrals we'll have to learn how to
integrate over general surfaces in r3
for example over here or over Hemisphere
all over tours and in case you get
worried that that's it because next when
becomes a three-dimensional right to
have a curved 3-dimensional domain we'd
have to go to four dimension space and
that's the subject for the next course
so we sitting for so we don't do it here
right so we we stopped at three
dimensional we only consider in this
class objects which can be embedded
immersed in a two-dimensional
three-dimensional space and therefore as
far as the three dimensional domains are
concerned they are all going to be flat
they're going to be for example the
interior of the sphere and the interior
of the sphere or a ball is three
dimensional and unlike the sphere which
is two-dimensional and curved the ball
is three dimensional and flat because it
just sits in a three dimensional space
which is flat okay to have something
curved 3-dimensional you'd have to go
introduce one more dimension so it has
to think of time but it will be very
difficult to visualize so we're not
going to do that okay
so now we need to talk about the
integrand we need to talk about the
objects that we will integrate over
those domains question yes
that's right that's right I would take
this so the question is what would be
the analog of passing to the boundary on
this picture right so on this picture on
the left hand side we would have a
double integral over this domain and on
the right-hand side of the formula we
would have a single integral over the
boundary of this domain now inside will
be on the left right when I take domain
I mean the interior that's the shaded
area here right that's the domain which
is two-dimensional so an example of a
kind of formula which we will prove will
be look as follows
on the Left we'll have a double integral
over this let's call this R or something
which I'm not going to specify now and
on the on the right hand side will have
R integral over this roughly over there
over the boundary boundary rules R or
something else
you see so that is that clear okay any
other questions yes right what did I
mean when I said that the upper
hemisphere has a boundary which is a
circle I'm kind of I don't have good
visual aids unfortunately so so I have
to just use my hands like this but you
think I'll think of an opera hemisphere
let me try to draw this here so it's
going to look something like this right
that's the dough like this right but it
does have a boundary which is this the
circle at the bottom is this boundary
you see right
the boundary means the following that
these are the points the difference
between a point here and the point in
the interior is the full length if you
have a point in the interior you can go
in any direction you like there are
there are two sort of two degrees of
freedom there are two possible two
independent directions in which you can
go by the way the same here if you take
a point in the interior you can go in
any direction right but if you are on
the boundary
I mean bound you can also go in all
directions but when I say well
directions I mean to go in some
directions and stay within the domain if
you want to stay within the domain you
can go inside you can go along the
boundary but you are prohibited from
going outside so some directions are
prohibited that's what it means to be on
the boundary likewise if you look at the
circle at the base of this dome you see
that you cannot go down this is
prohibited you can only go sort of up on
the dome or you can go along the
boundary right that's the difference
between this point but even if you have
even if you have a point even very close
to the boundary you can still go down a
little bit so that's the difference any
other questions yes
right right not every because see I
haven't put I have I have not put the
integrand yet we'll have to learn that
see the trick is that at the level of
domains you take the boundary but at the
level of the integrand you take the
derivative this way so in other words
what you will have here will
automatically I write it as a derivative
of something which is on the right hand
side so it's not the most general
integral you see here it's the integral
of something which is a derivative of
something from the right so if this is
not a formula which allows you to
express any double integral as a single
integral but only it allows you to
express a double integral of something
which is the derivative as a single
integral of the quantity of which it is
a derivative that's the idea but we'll
talk about this more later so I don't
want to spend too much time making it
precise at the moment okay so what we
need to do now is to describe the kind
of objects that we'll have to integrate
to really do justice so this kind of
formula and the point is that it's not
enough to just integrate functions we
have to interact integrate more general
objects which are called vector fields
and of course everybody knows what this
concept is maybe not the term so it's
actually very intuitive concept which
I'm going to explain
so the way to think about it is follows
first of all let's remember what is a
vector to begin with what is the vector
a vector we could work in on everything
that I will say will be can be applied
in R 2 and R 3 on the plane and in space
but it will be easier to say in our - it
was just fewer components and so on so
let me say it first in R 2 and then we
will generalize in selecting R 2 on the
plane what is the vector in r2 rather
than R 2 and we know can be well first
of all we can draw it like this right
it's a it's a it's a it's an object
which has not only magnitude but also
direction so this is a vector right but
algebraically we represent it by a pair
of numbers we write it as P Q so it's
not just a single number it can be
represented by a pair of numbers once
you choose a coordinate system PQ and O
and we will also use the different
notation VI plus QJ remember we've
learned this with IMG a with our
notation for the unit vectors along the
x axis and along the y axis okay so so
that's a single vector that's just one
there but suppose you would like to
attach a vector to each point on the
plane
suppose we have attached vector at a
quantity like this to each point on the
plane so what does it what is it going
what is it going to look like well say
say this point we'll have this vector
and then this point will have that
vector and then this point will of this
vector this point of this vector so a
priority cannot be different
it cannot be different there should be
no connection of course the simple
situation would be just assigning the
same one to all points but it's kind of
boring
so you can actually tell you can just
sign them in a very complicated way so
this actually occurs in practice in
reality and may need in different ways
and the simplest way to think about it
is as wind wind maps wind maps actually
it's funny because in the book the
picture which illustrates vector fields
is the picture of of the wind map of a
San Francisco Bay Area so I guess for a
good reason because you know our winds
are change and they kind of have an
interesting pattern
some years ago I used to do a lot of
wind surfing and I remember it was this
website where you could go and you get a
beautiful picture of the of the wind
real-time you know the winds real-time
all over all across the San Francisco
Bay so if you want to if you want to win
surf so let's say that this is a bay
roughly this is San Francisco this is
the book it's the Golden Gate Bridge
you know this is San Francisco so
it's very schematic okay and hmm and
this is Berkeley I'm looking from the
top oh yes it's important to say that
right I'm moving from the from the air
so there are few let's say there are
many spots in across the Bay for
windsurfing so let's say here in the
Berkeley marina this is M revealed and
here you have a Treasure Island and off
and so on and so if you look at this map
you know right away that the wind here
is say east points in if it is eastward
winds and then like here would be Norse
and here will be south whatever right so
that that's the meaning of all sea in
such maps you can already can imagine
such maps because the thing about winds
is that the wind does not just have
magnitude the force of the wind but also
has direction it could point in the
north area in the northern direction
east west south and so on right so a
wind at the given point is the vector
it's not a number it's a vector but wind
is everywhere so therefore we're at each
point you have a vector the wind vector
right so so wind represents the vector
field so this is a vector field so a
vector field is the what is an
assignment of a vector to each point on
the plane or maybe some given domain on
the plane maybe not everywhere but I
mean of course say here I talk about a
particular domain which is on the map
say which is just San Francisco Bay Area
I'm not talking about the entire you
know United States or entire state of
California so this is the vector set
this clear okay so now let me contrast
that to a function up to now we've
talked about functions and we've been
integrating functions a function would
be just a function means assigning to
each point not a vector but a number for
example think of a barometric pressure
at each point you have a barometric
pressure dramatic pressure is not a
vector it's a number so at each point
you have a bra metric pressure at each
point you have a number so you get a
function what we normally call the
function is assignment over number
each point on the plane and vector field
is almost like this the only difference
is that we assign to each point not a
number but a vector but in some sense
why not right okay so how would we
represent such a vector field
algebraically algebraically well each of
those guys each of those vectors would
have two components would have two
components but now this component
depends on the point so a point X Y so
if you have a point X Y on the plane
would have a vector which will have
components P of X Y and Q of X Y so we
will write P of XY q XY and we will put
the square brackets as we usually do
right or we can also write it as P of X
Y times I plus Q of X Y times J just
like we did before just like we did
before P Q or P i+ q j the only
difference is that now p and q
themselves become functions right so
it's P of XY Q of XY and we will call
this vector field f of X Y so oftentimes
you know for practical purposes you can
say that a vector field is nothing but a
pair of functions so it's not a single
function it's two functions because the
vector has two components and now each
component becomes a function of X Y but
really reducing it to a pair of
functions is is not a good idea because
it kind of strips the vector of which
geometric meaning because the vector is
much more than just a pair of numbers
first of all this pair of numbers can be
given only once we choose the
coordinates
right I mean after all what are these
numbers P and Q I have drawn them here
those numbers are the projections of the
vector onto the x and y axis right but
if I choose a different coordinate
system
those vector will stay the same the
vector will stay the same but the
projections will be different so that
you have to remember this algebraic
representation religious bans on the
choice of coordinates right but the
vector itself doesn't in other words
let's say here is a map of San Frisco
Bay Area something could be area it
doesn't know anything about coordinates
it exists without any coordinates
somebody will come and make coordinate
system like this but somebody else will
come and make it like this
who knows maybe for some purposes this
would be more convenient okay the wind
doesn't know by the coordinate system
this vector will say the wind will blow
in this direction no matter what
coordinate system you'll prescribe right
so that so so the wind is for real it's
a real geometric object and the two
numbers that we assign or two numbers
which we use to represent this vector is
an abstraction either is the kind of a
way to to represent them algebraically
but this way of representing it
algebraically depends on the choice of
coordinates so that's why I am saying
that reducing a vector to a pair of
numbers or reducing a vector field to a
pair of functions somehow doesn't do
justice to the object it reduce it sort
of reduces it strips it of its geometric
meaning nevertheless in our calculations
oftentimes we will be working with
vector fields as though they were just
represented by these two functions so
for all practical purposes we just have
to integrate those functions say or
differentiate those functions
independently okay yes that's right so
so let's say at this point this is the
point XY so you have this vector so here
is another point which would say we'll
have say x1 and y1
coordinate and at this point let me use
a different chalk to to visit to
represent vectors so let's say this
vector goes like this the vector sign
this is vector assign to the point XY to
the point XY and say a detector science
at this point will be this vector so
this vector will have will be P of X 1 Y
1 comma Q of X 1 Y 1 cap really has
nothing to do with this you see what I
mean at each point you have a vector
well function represents a bunch of
numbers right so in other words say this
function what is a function function is
a number attached to each point XY for
any X Y you have some number and now you
have these two functions assembled into
a vector right so you have a vector for
each XY the vector attached to X Y say
would be this vector and a vector
attached to x1 y1 will be this vector a
vector attached to x2 y2 will be this
vector and so on we represented by a
formula so let's say let's see and let's
look at an example of a vector field
[Applause]
okay so the simplest example would be
lets say that f of XY is just AI what
does it mean it means that P in this
case is 1 and Q is 0 right from the
point of view of this general formula P
times I plus Q times J P is 1 and Q is 0
so I just write it as I what is the
geometric meaning of this of this
formula well it says that the vector
attached to any point is 1 in the same
vector I right so what does it look like
well at each point I just have vector I
this is vector I it's a vector which is
parallel to the x-axis and has has
magnitude 1 so here I have this vector
and here and of this vector and so on I
cannot draw them all because I cannot
account for all the points on this
blackboard or even like on small part of
the breadboard because I intend to many
of them so I'm just drawing a few of
this and this is this is what's called a
diagram the vector field diagram and
that's what it's meant to is not it is
not meant to represent the entire vector
field because of course inevitably no
matter how many vectors I will draw I
will miss some points there are
infinitely many of those this is just
meant to give you an idea as to what the
vector field looks like because of
course the point is that in this studies
in this course we are going to consider
kind of nice the vector fields we'll
consider would be nice in a sense that
the vector field in general the vectors
will change from point to point but they
will change in a continuous manner
in a smooth manner so even if you know
about the vector what the vectors look
like a sort of certain number of points
this should give you an idea as to what
vectors look like in between ok so this
is a simple vector field it's called the
constant vector field
okay so let's do something more
complicated something more complicated
question yes shoot that's right nor if
we say a vector field on the plane
that's right very good question so
question is do we have to assign a
vector to each point to every point on
the plane or not okay and it's the same
kind of question is as asking suppose
you have a function does it mean that we
have assigned a number to each point and
the quiet answer is it depends right by
default if I just say this is a function
on the line or on the plane I'm saying
that it is defined everywhere but we
know that there are many interesting
functions which are not defined
everywhere
for example even a one-dimensional
context say function f of X equals 1
over X this is an important function and
it's not defined at 0 so this function
assigns the number to every point X on
the line except x equals 0 sometimes we
only want to know the values of the
function on a certain domain let's say
on an interval from 0 to 1 and we don't
care what happens at other points same
goes for the vector fields but if we say
vectors on the plane we sort of we kind
of implicitly saying that there is a
vector attached to every point but in
many situations first of all a formula
that we write will not be well-defined
at some points on the plane right so
then it means that the vector field is
not defined there or it could mean it
could be that we just only care about
the values across the certain domain so
we only define it on that domain and we
don't care what happens outside of it
any other questions all right so next
example let's say f of XY equals
x times i that no let me use the way i
pi + YG okay so this is slightly more
interesting this is certainly not this
is certainly not the constant vector
field because now the function P of XY
is not a constant function but it is
function X and Q of XY is a function y
right let's see so what does it look
like so for example let's say we take
the point 1 0 if we take the point 1 0 I
should put up I should put an arrow of
course when I talk about vectors I have
to put arrows on top that's that's the
usual notation so let's say F at 1 at 1
0 this is a point 1 0 if I substitute 1
0 I get I so here it's going to be
vector ax just like in the previous
example but this is really the only
point where it is going to be vector
let's take for example the point 0 1 0 1
we get J so this is the point 0 1 and we
get this vector and likewise for example
you can take negative 1 say you can put
plus minus 1 here and this will be plus
minus I so this will go in this
direction this will be negative 5 at
this point and likewise here plus minus
1 will be plus minus J so this will be
this vector so this guy already gives
kind of tells you what the pattern is
pattern is that at each point in fact
the vector go is going to go in the
direction of the position vector of that
point for example with the point 1 0 the
position vector of this point is this
vector and the value of our vector field
is going to be just that vector you see
so but we draw it it wouldn't be right
to draw this vector at starting at this
point because we are
drawing this picture with then this
changing that the vector that starts at
this point is the vector assigned at
this point right but of course as we
discussed many times a vector the same
vector can be represented in many
different ways you can start with any
point here we start with the point to
which it is attached this vector is
attached to the point 1 0 so we draw it
here this vector is attached to the
point 0 1 is written here so we draw it
here and so on and more generally if we
take if we have a point with coordinates
X Y coordinates X Y the vector attached
to this point is going to be X I plus y
J but that just happens to be in this
example it just happens to be the
position vector of this point which we
normally draw like this so what should I
draw then for this point I have to take
this vector and transport it here so
that the initial point is here and not
here right so then I end up with this I
just can't transport it here so that's
the vector I J this is vector X I plus y
J which is prescribed to this point and
it's the same as this vector so I can
now kind of draw more so you see the
they all move away from the center they
all move away from the origin at each
point the direction is exactly away from
the origin but the magnitude actually
changes the magnitude changes the
magnitude is equal to the length of the
distance from the origin so if I go far
away the magnitude will be even higher
if I am very close the magnitude very
small ok so that's the that's the vector
field that I get it's kind of some
explosion it's kind of an explosion well
it's not quite an explosion because if I
have an explosion it actually decays as
you as you go farther away but here
actually the force increases the vector
the magnitude increases
it's like a universe expanding that's
right it's one of the scenarios of
course we would like to think that it's
expanding but in it is expanding now but
we don't know what will happen
eventually and it might all collapse but
not before the end of the semester don't
worry so unless some of those formulas
are incorrect so okay but let's let's
suppose that you want it you want it the
same kind of deal in other words you
wanted to you wanted a vector field
which also goes away from the origin but
you didn't want it to the magnitude to
be higher and higher or greater and
greater let's say you wanted the vector
field where each vector has magnitude 1
this is very easy to do you can just
convert each of those vectors into a
unit vector pointing in the same
direction so let's say third example
would be you would have to take x times
I plus y times J and divide by the
magnitude and the magnitude is x squared
plus y squared at square root of x
squared plus y squared so now each of
these vectors is a unit vector pointing
in the direction of the position vector
like before so in other words the
magnitude is not increasing but it stays
fixed equal to 1 or if you want this
magnitude to to the vector field to
decay you can divide by higher power of
this so for instance you can also take f
of XY equals x I plus YJ but divided by
by actually you could divide by the
square of this but it is a little better
to divide by the cube and I was playing
Y squared plus that's Y squared
we have if we do that then the magnitude
of this vector the magnitude of this
vector or the length if you will of this
vector will be what when we take the
magnitude we get we get square root of x
squared plus y squared in the numerator
right and we get the sister right no
actually I don't want three over two I
want actually how do I want it I want to
have twice square of the length that's
right now it was correct let's do this
exactly what I want so the the magnitude
would then be one divided by x squared
plus y squared right which is the square
of the length which is square of X Y so
that responds to vector field where the
magnitude is proportional to the or
equal to the inverse square of the
length of the distance and this is very
typical for a very important forces in
nature so this is going to be the
behavior of the sector field is like the
behavior of the force of gravity force
of gravity or the electric force at the
magnet force okay the force of gravity
is inverse proportional to the square of
the distance and that's exactly what we
get but because in the numerator we have
the vector position vector itself we
divide by instead of dividing by the
second power where we divide by the
third power so that when we take the
length there will be one power here and
three powers here so only two powers on
the left okay
yes
because I would like to get the be here
I would like to get a vector field such
that the length of a vector is equal to
the one divided by the square of the
length of this because this kind of
behavior is Christic of important forces
in nature like the force of gravity you
know that there if you have two masses
say a Sun and Earth two masses then two
objects and then the supports of gravity
is inverse proportional to the square of
the distance between them and also
proportion to the masses and there's
some coefficient equal proportionality
do we do what do we cube every problem
we do this this is just tip one example
okay
one example I'm not saying that all
vector fields look like this it's just
it's just one vector field okay all
right so just trying to illustrate how
you can produce new vector fields by
starting with some known vector field
okay so the next question is so if these
are the vector fields and that question
is how do we integrate this vector
fields so what I am going to explain is
how to integrate vector fields over
course
that's right why would we be interested
in this right so that's the question
Wow yeah it is the math class come on
but no seriously of course we wouldn't
be doing that if they weren't a good
reason for it and there is a good reason
for it which I'm going to explain now
okay what I mean by this comment is that
in math I'm not trying to say that we do
useless stuff on the contrary with the
very useful stuff but sometimes it takes
a while to really get to really
appreciate what exactly this is good for
and so you have to be patient sometimes
okay
but in this case actually you don't have
to be patient because I'm going to
explain it right away so so this is one
of those cases okay so so I would like
to explain the real the real problem
which actually leads we'll leave that
naturally to the notion of an integral
of a vector field over curve and it's
actually very easy to explain and this
has to do with calculating the work done
by a force so by the way one important
example of a vector field which I have
not met which I kind of alluded to here
when I say force of gravity I should say
it more forcefully probably which is
that forces forces in general a vector
field I represented by vector fields
right because a force also has a
magnitude and direction usually like
force it pushes you in a certain
direction not only and which is with
different like you know levels of
strength but also push you in a certain
direction or pull you in a certain
direction like force of gravity force of
gravity pulls me down and not you know
I'm not flying out of this class which
some of you may want it but I'm staying
here and the only thing and the only
thing that happens is that what this
floor prevents me from falling down but
if suddenly this floor will disappear I
would go down right so I would go down
not
up and not right not not left that means
that the force of gravity in this case
actually has a very specific direction
down like the Apple which fell on
Newton's head right so force has a
certain direction and likewise
electromagnetic force and other forces
see they are represented by vector
fields and if you have a force then
oftentimes you may be interested in the
amount of work that a force a certain
force field of force vector field does
in moving an object from one point to
another from point A to point B okay and
the upshot is that this kind of quantity
the work done by force is precisely
represented by an integral over curve
where the curve would be the path along
which the force moves the object let's
say particle if it's the electromagnetic
field or if it's the force of gravity it
could be some you know any object if you
want so but to explain this to explain
why an integral okay as always we have
to go back to kind of the elementary
situation where everything is simplified
where the force is constant and the
displacement is kind of like linear and
we look at the formula for the work and
then we kind of average it out over a
general curve okay and that's how we get
to the integral so the first question
I'm going to ask is what is the amount
of work that is needed to move a
particle from the say from this point to
this point along a linear segment with
some displacement Delta R if you have a
constant vector field if a force is
constant so forces everywhere constant
like in my first example where it was I
like this what is the amount of work
needed to move
particle from point A to point de to be
in the constant force vector scale like
this so in other words the value of the
of the force is the same everywhere and
actually it's very easy to illustrate
this in the following way and I will do
it not with the particle but I will do
to this array do you see this is the
correct what I'm talking about I'm
moving this unfortunately erase it but
but I hope you memorize it memorize what
was here let's do it again No
so okay you see I'm moving this razor
from this point to this point and I'm
applying force now the most efficient
way to do it would be to use my for the
force to be go exactly parallel to the
to the blackboard right but in reality I
don't do this because I also want to
push on a push sort of against the
blackboard so firstly I don't lose the
eraser and also to raise it better right
so in other words often times the
displacement vector and the force vector
are not parallel to each other that's
natural for example you know I can go
like this so here there is a component
of my force which moving it which is
moving it this way but there is also a
component which goes this way and keeps
it close to the blackboard and I can do
it like this you know or I can do it
like this a stupid thing to do would be
to go like this because then I wouldn't
be able to move right so in order in
order to to do to do this I have to have
a nonzero component in this direction
but then I can have some component in
the in the transverse direction so the
question is what is the work that has
been that has been done and the point is
that what is essential for this process
is not the force itself but only the
horizontal component the component in
the direction of displacement you see in
other words the work work is equal to
the
the displacement which is let's just
write in work displacement times the
component of the force component of the
force along the displacement vector in
other words what matters is how
thoroughly I erase the blackboard it
doesn't matter how much I sweat doing
this you see so what I'm talking about
is not how much how much work I have
done by the question is how much what is
the result you see and for the result it
doesn't matter how much pressure I was
applying to towards the board what
matters is how much force I applied in
the direction of the displacement vector
so that's why I get this formula but if
so it means that algebraically
algebraically I draw this this is a
displacement that I can draw it again
right and so this is the force the force
vector and this is displacement vector
let's call it Delta R and so the work is
the work done moving this particle is if
L is Delta R times F but not F but
rather this this is some angle theta so
so this is actually the length of this
is f length of F times cosine of this
angle some times cosine of theta so what
I'm trying to say that it is just a dot
product between G R and that's what I'm
trying to say the work is the dot
product of the displacement vector and
the force vector in this kind of
simplified situation where displacement
is linear and the vector field is
constant okay or if you want you could
write it as f GI f dot doesn't matter
sorry I should've written here not Delta
misread okay so that's the idealized
situation and now the general situation
will be as follows I will have a more
general curve not necessarily a line
segment so it will be let me do it like
this it will be like this let's say and
this will be some point a a and the
speed and at each point I will have some
they want like this so you see that the
vector field change it has different
values at different points like this
okay so let's suppose I would like to
calculate the work done by by this force
in moving this particle from this point
to this point along this curve so what
should i do I should break it into small
pieces and this is the typical thing it
should be almost reflex by now because
this is the kind of thing we always do
when we talk about integrals right we
break it into small pieces and each
small piece we approximate by this
idealized situation where this will be a
displacement will be just linear right
and the vector field will be constant
because if the vector field where is in
a continuous way in a smooth way more
precisely differentiable if it is
differentiable right so then it is a
good approximation on each on a small
segment sub segment here to think that
the vector field actually doesn't change
so much so
approximation to replace it by the value
at any given point within this in small
interval right and then the work will be
that will be equal to the total work
will be the sum of the work done on each
of the small intervals and this will be
the sum of F they evaluate at some point
along this within this interval dot
Delta RI right and so you know what will
happen you know what will happen when
this partition becomes finer and finer
the sum will converge to an integral
because this of course it's very
reminiscent of all the all kinds of
integrals we've done up to now we've
done you know double integrals and we
have done integrals a triple integrals
and many many others and it's always the
same idea that if you have an expression
like this where you have a sum over is
small you know over this part over this
kind of partition there in the limit you
just replace this by an integral and
this is valid we if all quantities
involved satisfy some natural conditions
like being differentiable and so the
result of this is an integral of FDR oh
I would I would like to say from A to B
but it's it would be a little bit it
would not be very would not be good idea
to write to start write it like this you
see when we were in one variable
calculus there was only one way connect
point A to point B because we were going
along the single line that we are given
here we are on the plane and there are
many different ways to connect this
point and of course the answer will
depend on which way I'm going
the longer the path the longer the work
the larger the work that will that will
be done okay so instead I will write it
like this where over C and I don't mean
like ABC but I just want to denote the
curve by C by letter C
so a and did you know the end points but
C denotes this entire curve it is
important however to remember the
intention of this curve we go from A to
B a note from B to a if we were going
from B to a the calculator calculation
would be different okay
so now what now let's talk about let's
talk about this formula so this was to
convince you that line that integrals
over an integral of a vector field over
curve is important it gives you the
quantities like the work done by by a
force on a on a certain particle let's
say but now I would like I have to
explain in more detail what what exactly
this integral stands for so I would like
to explain it in more detail and also
give you recipe how to calculate it
okay so let me write it down one more
time
f G R over C so for the dot product we
have a nice formula in terms of the
components of the vector so let me
remind you that F is a vector field
which looks like this it's V times V of
XY times I plus Q of X Y times J right
and what is dr g r is the vector which
is VX times I plus dy times J so let's
take the dot product of this two dot
product is going to be P of XY DX plus Q
of XY dy so in retrospect
the result actually looks very natural
because you see in the single variable
calculus the only quantity that we were
allowed to integrate or integrals like
this you know let's say F DX f of X DX
well first of all there was a function
which depended on the on one variable
because it's single variable calculus
but also they only had there was only
one DX we could only integrate against
DX because there were no other variables
now we are on the plane so there is DX
and there is dy so we could integrate a
quantity of the form P times DX and we
could integrate a quantity of the form Q
times dy and this is the most general
expression which we could actually
integrate over curve in two dimensional
space now we got this by thinking in
terms of the work done by force and by
writing it in a dot product of the force
vector field and VR but you see the end
result is actually very nice and you
could actually could have actually
written this end result from the
beginning is the most natural expression
really that we could think of
integrating over a given curve again
because you have DX and dy and then each
of them could come with some factor with
some function which would be some
function P and some function Q ok so now
the only thing that remains is to need
to explain how to actually compute this
and this is where the methods which we
developed at the very beginning of this
course are going to become very useful
I'm talking about of course a parametric
curves to compute this integral we need
to parameterize our curve ok so to
compute
we parameterize our curve our curve C in
other words a curve would like this
right but we parameterize it which means
that we're actually identifying it with
a certain interval but an interval and
then some axillary on some auxiliary
line with the coordinate which we
usually call T so we identify this curve
object this curve on the plane with a
straight object with a line segment on
this axillary line we kind of identify
this point with this and and we identify
this point with this and the point in
the middle identified in short way right
so that there is a one-to-one
correspondence between point here and
point here and algebraically we write it
like this we say X is f of T and Y is G
of T along the score and we put some
limits on T from A to B so here the
point the endpoints were actually points
on the plane I could not have that's why
I called em capital capital A and
capital B because actually capital A was
a pair of numbers it was some which
actually now I can write as f of a and G
of a and this B is f of B and G of B
right and so so let's substitute this in
this formula so what do we get we will
get integral now just over this interval
which is great because this is already
kind of integral what we get in single
variable calculus before it was an
integral over this curve but now we
write this integral over this curve as
an integral over the line segment by
using this parameter ization and it
looks as follows
have to substitute instead of x and y we
have such as F of T and G of T and then
we have to write DX in terms of T but
what is DX DX is of course just F prime
DT just by usual formula DX is f prime
of T DT and dy is G prime of T DT so I
replace DX with VX by F prime of T
tonight and then I write the second one
which is Q of F of T G of T times G
prime and I I close the breath or if you
will you can write it at the sum of two
integrals this is the first integral and
this is the second one but you see I
have by using the by using the
parametric form for this curve I have
been able to rewrite this integral which
involves x and y as this as an integral
in one axillary variable namely T ok so
let's see we have actually one minute to
do a to do an example of this so let's
say compute the integral of G DX plus X
dy plus y DZ see a nonprofit I'm doing
it in three-dimensional space just to
show you that actually everything works
out in the same way in the
three-dimensional space as in a
two-dimensional space the difference is
that now you have three variables X Y Z
and likewise you have DX dy and DZ and
so let's say you have a curve in which X
is T squared Y is T cube and V is T
squared
okay and T goes from 0 to 1 so the first
term so so likewise for DZ you will have
some H prime of T DT or h2 formula for
four four six five so this will be the
integral from zero to one Z is equal to
T squared DX is equal to 2t times D plus
X is equal sorry I put Z plus XG DX X is
equal to T squared dy is equal to three
T squared DT and finally here you have T
cube and this is 2 T so you end up with
a very simple integral in one variable
ok so we stop here and we will continue
on Thursday